Hello, and welcome back to
Computer Forensics Bootcamp.
In this module, we're
going to talk about
the forensic methodology
and investigations.
The investigative process.
The first thing we want to do
is we want to do some
case preparation.
What case preparation is,
is we're going to gather
information before we even
start up our computer.
Before the start of our
forensic examination,
the first things
we do is to try to
define what type of
case we are looking at.
To do that, we're going to need
to answer some basic questions.
First and foremost, what
is this case about?
Is this a larceny case?
Is this a robbery case?
Is this an intellectual
property theft?
What type of case are looking at?
The next thing we're
going to talk about is,
what evidence can we
expect to recover?
What crime do we think or
violation do we think
was committed and
what type of evidence
do we expect to
find on this particular
computer that we're examining?
The next question we may
want a answer is where most
likely will this
evidence be located
on the computer itself
within the file system?
To do that, we're
going to have to know
a little bit about
where computers store
certain data as a
default location
and we're going to
talk about that
throughout this course.
The next thing we have
to think about is
what are our legal restrictions?
Is there a limitation
on the scope of
our search warrant or on
the scope of our
search authority?
Or is this a special case
where we may be
dealing with something
that is proprietary property
or privileged information?
The next question we're
going to want to answer is,
who is involved in this
and what is their role?
Are they a suspect?
Are they a victim?
Are they a witness?
These will help us determine
what we're going to
do and how we're going
to formulate our
search strategies.
Commonly, there are four phases
in the investigative process.
We have our collection
and storage,
our preservation, our
analysis and testing,
and our reporting and testifying.
Criminal investigations.
If you're doing a
criminal investigation,
this deals with offenses
against the state.
Somebody broke some sort of law,
whether it's state,
federal, local.
In these cases, a court
must authorize the
search warrant,
and we must abide by
the rules of evidence.
We have to keep these in mind.
I'm going to talk
about legal issues
throughout this course.
Each investigative model
is going to have to follow
the procedures of their
particular jurisdiction,
their particular court system.
A civil investigation.
This covers a lot
of things that are
not covered by criminal law.
It could be a
violation of contract,
it could be a civil lawsuit,
it could be a custody dispute,
a divorce, or any other
type of civil case.
Usually, with civil cases,
there is a financial aspect.
Nobody's going to
go to jail or lose
their freedom but there is
some type of financial aspect.
Usually, the equipment and
the data that can be
inspected are going to be
negotiated and a long
time may pass before
these devices are seized.
Civil investigations tend to be
data-driven and the
extracted data,
like I said, must be
filtered by the
court's requirements.
You may have limitations
on what you can examine
and what you can look at.
You may only be able to look at
photos or you may
only be able to look
at messages or documents.
It depends on the
type of case and
what the court decides.
Administrative investigations are
usually fact-finding inquiries.
These type of things
are that somebody
broke a rule or a
policy or a protocol.
It's some type of
professional misconduct.
A lot of times
we're talking about
fraud audits or somebody
looking at something
they're not supposed to be on
their company
computer or using it
for something they're not
supposed to be using it for.
This is a generic model of
on scene flow that we would
use when we're dealing
with collecting
evidence on a scene.
The first concern is going to be
scene safety and that's going to
apply no matter what type of
investigation you are doing.
The next thing we want to
think about when we're
collecting evidence is we
want to isolate the evidence.
If the evidence is
connected to a network,
the evidence could be
altered or remotely wiped
so we want to get the
evidence off the network.
The next thing we want to do is
we want to document the scene.
You want to take photographs,
draw a diagram, do a video.
But you want to show that
scene as it was when you
first arrive before
anybody moves anything.
The next thing we're
going to do is
we're going to scan the scene and
identify what could
be evidence to us.
Once we've identified our
possible sources of evidence,
we're going to collect them
and we're going to do
so in a proper manner,
and we're going to
document that collection.
What I mean by that
is you're going to
document who found it,
where they found it, what time.
All these things are very
important when it comes
to authenticating
the evidence later on in
any type of court action.
Now these next
three boxes you see
in that reddish color are
only going to apply if you
have a forensic expert on scene,
because if you don't,
after documenting the collection,
what's going to happen is
people are going to pull
the plugs from the
back of the computers,
and package the evidence,
but if you have a forensic person
on scene, a forensic examiner,
and you come across
a running computer,
the first thing you
want to do is look and
see if there's any type of
destructive process running.
The three things we
want to look for is
RAM, encryption, and destruction.
I like to use the acronym RED.
The R stands for RAM,
and that's going to be
random access memory.
Once the computer is shut off,
that random access
memory is gone,
so we're going to
lose all that data.
The E in RED, encryption.
If you have an encrypted
volume that is up
and open in RAM and you
shut the computer off,
you may never be able to
examine that volume because
encryption is going to kick in
and if you can't get back in,
you will not be able to
see what is on that
encrypted volume.
Then I mentioned destructive,
if this destructive
process is running,
you want to immediately pull
the plug from the back of
the computer to stop
that destructive
process from running.
If it's a laptop, make sure
you take the battery out.
If we do have an up
and running computer,
the first thing we want
to do is collect RAM.
If we have an
encrypted volume up,
we want to take a logical
image of that volume,
so at least we have that in
case we cannot get back
into that encrypted volume.
Maybe the suspect won't
give up the password,
or there could be other reasons
why we can't get back in.
Again, destructive
processes pull the plug.
If you come across a computer
that is off and you have
a forensic expert
on the scene and
you suspect that there might be
evidence on that computer and
the case is urgent,
it could be a missing kid,
it could be that you want
to get enough evidence to
make an arrest because you're
afraid your suspect will flee,
you might want to do
an on-scene preview
of that computer.
The other issue is triage.
If you come upon a scene where
you have multiple devices,
you don't just want to
collect everything.
You don't want to take 10 or 20
computers when only one or
two may have evidence
that's going to be
relevant to your case.
You might want to do some triage,
so you don't have to
collect everything.
Once that is done,
you would properly
package the evidence.
Package computers
in plastic unless
there is some liquid
on the computer.
It could be a body fluid
or there just could be
some type of liquid,
in that case, package
the computer in paper.
You're going to properly
then transport the evidence.
You want to package it
so that it's secure
and not going to be
damaged during transport,
and when you get the evidence
back to your location,
you're going to want to
put that evidence in
a secure room where
access is limited.
Forensic analysis preparation.
Now that we've got our
evidence back to our lab,
we're going to examine it.
The first thing we're
going to do is you
want to review all the paperwork.
What I mean by that
is you want to
read all the reports
that were written.
If there is a search warrant
involved or a court order,
you want to read that too.
You want to make sure you
understand where the scope of
your authority comes from
and what your scope is.
You may have a limited
search and you want
to make sure you
understand that before
you begin your analysis.
You want to make a plan
to examine the computer.
Again we talked about
understanding what
type of case you're
investigating and what type
of evidence you want to find,
and where you think that
evidence might be located.
Again confirm your search
authority and scope.
That is so important,
because you may have
a limited scope,
and that may be one sentence
in an entire search warrant,
but if you miss
that one sentence,
you're going to be violating
your search authority.
Be aware of and
plan for conflicts.
What I mean by that
is you may have
a computer that came from
an attorney's office and that's
going to be privileged
information.
You could have
medical information
that would be limited by HIPAA.
You could have somebody
who's a writer and they
have their proprietary
information on there.
You want to make sure you're
aware of all the conflicts.
You also want to be aware
of what tools you have,
what tools are available,
and what tools you might need for
this investigation in case
you have to obtain another tool.
You're going to have to go
back and refine your plan as
needed as you progress
through the investigation.
This is a generic model for
what happens at the lab.
When a detective or somebody
brings a computer
to you to examine,
there's going to be some form of
intake where you documented who
brought it to you and what
date and time you received it.
Then you're going to photograph
the evidence and you're
going to document
the evidence noting any damage to
that evidence before it
became in your custody.
You want to photograph and
document the evidence.
You're going to document the
make, model, serial number,
and any type of damage and
you're going to take photographs.
You're going to
preserve the evidence,
and this usually involves
some type of write blocking.
You're not writing to
the original evidence.
Then you're going to
create a bit-stream copy.
You're going to image that drive.
Once you're done with that,
you're going to
validate the copy,
you're going to take one
last hash and validate if
you haven't made any changes
to the original evidence,
and then you're going to secure
the original evidence in
a place where access
is controlled.
When you're done with that,
you're going to examine
the copy of the evidence.
We never work on the
original evidence,
we always work off of a copy.
You're going to
report your findings.
You're going to have your
report peer reviewed,
you're going to have it looked at
by another professional and
then you're going to
present your findings.
We have some special type
of cases that you'll
probably come across in
the corporate world,
like an intellectual property
theft investigation.
In this case, you want
to always consider
the suspect's computer
a crime scene.
That device should be
considered a crime scene.
You want to immediately preserve.
Do not access that device and do
not allow anybody else
to access that device.
You're going to want
to take a look and see
how the suspect may
have exfiltrated data.
We're looking at how the suspect
got the data off the computer.
Did he use a DVD or
CD or USB device?
Did he use that computer
to transfer data
to a home network?
What type of activities
was he doing?
Was he negotiating a salary
with another company,
with a competitor?
Was he selling
proprietary information?
Were there any mass
deletions or drive
wiping or programs that
are meant to hide
or destroy data?
You want to take a look
at all that when you're
investigating and intellectual
property theft case.
E-discovery cases, which would be
another case you
would come across
in a corporate type environment,
are not the same as your
ordinary examination.
What you're doing in an
e-discovery case is you're
collecting information and this
may be in response to a lawsuit,
a freedom of information request,
or some other type
of investigation.
These types of data that
you're going to be looking to
collect are going to be emails,
documents, presentations,
databases,
perhaps voicemails or some
other type of media file,
you're going to look at
social media remnants that
may be left on the
computer and websites.
E-discovery, you're going
to be looking at metadata.
It's focused on the metadata
as opposed to
collecting the data.
How, when and where was
this document created,
these are going to be
more of a focus than
the actual content.
Then you must know
where the data is.
Where is it you're going
to locate this data?
Is it archived?
A lot of companies use
email archival systems.
So you're going to have to
understand where this data is,
you're going to be thinking
about the documents metadata,
when, how, and where
it was collected.
When you're doing an
e-discovery project,
you're going to have to
scope it and this is going
to begin with a data
mapping exercise.
You're also going
to have to identify
the physical location
of the data.
The data maybe on
a server off-site,
the data may be in the Cloud.
You're going to have
to understand all of
those aspects when you're
doing an e-discovery case.
In the next module,
we're going to download
software and get our systems
ready to start examining
digital evidence.